>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, MARCH 13:
THE COUNTDOWN TO PIVOTAL
PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARIES IN FIVE
STATES: THE CANDIDATES TRY TO
GET OUT THEIR VOTE.
GERMANS GO TO THE POLLS IN A
TEST OF POPULARITY FOR
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL AND HER
HANDLING OF THE REFUGEE CRISIS.
AND WE'LL EXPLORE THE
INTERSECTION OF INCOME
INEQUALITY AND LIFE EXPECTANCY:
THE RICH ARE LIVING LONGER.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
OHIO RECEIVED THE BULK OF
CANDIDATE ATTENTION TODAY, AS IT
AND FOUR OTHER STATES-- FLORIDA,
ILLINOIS, MISSOURI, AND NORTH
CAROLINA-- PREPARE TO HOLD
PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARIES ON
TUESDAY.
ON THE REPUBLICAN SIDE, OHIO
GOVERNOR JOHN KASICH AND FLORIDA
SENATOR MARCO RUBIO CAMPAIGNED
IN THEIR DELEGATE RICH HOME
STATES, HOPING TO THWART
BUSINESSMAN DONALD TRUMP AND
TEXAS SENATOR TED CRUZ, WHO ARE
WELL AHEAD IN DELEGATES NEEDED
TO WIN THEIR PARTY'S NOMINATION.
YESTERDAY, RUBIO AND KASICH
SPLIT THE DELEGATES AT THE
WASHINGTON, D.C. CONVENTION:
RUBIO NARROWLY WON AND EARNED 10
DELEGATES, AND KASICH PLACED
SECOND TAKING NINE.
IN WYOMING, CRUZ EASILY WON THE
STATE CONVENTION AND NABBED NINE
OF THE 11 DELEGATES, FOLLOWED BY
RUBIO AND TRUMP WITH ONE EACH.
OVERALL, TRUMP LEADS THE
REPUBLICANS WITH 460 DELEGATES,
ALMOST 40% OF THE NUMBER NEEDED
TO WIN THE NOMINATION, WHILE
CRUZ HAS 369 DELEGATES, RUBIO
HAS 163, AND KASICH, 63.
CRUZ SAID TODAY HIS PARTY SHOULD
NOT FEAR IF NO ONE CANDIDATE
GOES OVER THE TOP BEFORE THIS
SUMMER'S NATIONAL CONVENTION.
>> IF DONALD AND I BOTH GO INTO
THE CONVENTION, AND WE'VE BOTH
GOT A BIG CHUNK OF DELEGATES,
BUT BOTH OF US ARE SHY OF 1,237,
THEN THE DELEGATES WILL DECIDE.
THAT'S THE WAY THE PROCESS
WORKS, AND THAT'S ALLOWING
DEMOCRACY TO OPERATE.
>> Stewart: TRUMP RETURNED TO
ILLINOIS TODAY, AFTER CANCELING
A FRIDAY RALLY IN CHICAGO AMIDST
FIGHTS BETWEEN SUPPORTERS AND
PROTESTERS, WITH A LARGE POLICE
PRESENCE, HIS SPEECH IN
BLOOMINGTON WENT OFF WITHOUT
INCIDENT.
ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE, FORMER
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY
CLINTON IS HALFWAY TO NUMBER OF
DELEGATES NEEDED TO CLINCH THE
NOMINATION.
SHE LEADS VERMONT SENATOR BERNIE
SANDERS IN TOTAL DELEGATES,
1,231 TO 576.
BOTH DEMOCRATS CAMPAIGNED IN
OHIO TODAY, WHERE 159 DELEGATES
ARE AT STAKE TUESDAY.
CLINTON BESTED BARACK OBAMA HERE
IN 2008, BUT SANDERS BEAT
CLINTON IN THE PRIMARY NEXT DOOR
IN MICHIGAN LAST WEEK.
OHIO IS WINNER TAKE-ALL FOR THE
REPUBLICANS, MEANING THE FIRST
PLACE CANDIDATE GETS ALL 66
DELEGATES.
FOR MORE ON THE OHIO CAMPAIGN, I
AM JOINED BY NICK CASTELE, THE
POLITICAL REPORTER FOR OUR
CLEVELAND PBS AFFILIATE WVIZ.
THE HEADLINES COMING OUT OF THE
CAMPAIGNS SOME OF THE BIGGEST
ONES ARE ABOUT THE ATMOSPHERE AT
THE RALLIES FOR THE REPUBLICAN
FRONT RUNNER DONALD TRUMP.
I KNOW YOU WENT TO ONE OF HIS
RALLIES IN CLEVELAND.
TELL ME WHAT YOU WITNESSED.
>> WELL THERE WERE A FEW OF THE
PROTESTERS THAT TRIED TO
INTERRUPT.
MAYBE HALF DOZEN.
I HEARD THERE WAS ONE SCUFFLE ON
THE FLOOR IN CLEVELAND AND THEN
OUTSIDE THE RALLY AFTERWARD,
THERE WERE PROTESTERS WHO WERE
WAITING THERE FOR TRUMP
SUPPORTERS TO COME OUT AND THERE
WERE SOME SHOUTING MATCHES THAT
BROKE OUT IN THE PARKING LOT
BETWEEN PROTESTERS AND THEN
DONALD TRUMP SUPPORTERS WHO
OUTNUMBERED THE PROTESTERS BY A
GREAT DEAL AND AT SOME POINT
WERE TRYING TO CHANT DOWN THE
PROTESTERS.
AND ALSO SOME VERY VICIOUS
THINGS WERE SAID BACK AND FORTH.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT THE ISSUES.
HOW IS DONALD TRUMP TRYING TO
CONNECT WITH OHIO VOTERS
SPECIFICALLY?
>> HE'S TALKING A LOT ABOUT
TRADE IN NORTHERN OHIO.
HE TRIED LINK GOVERNOR JOHN
KASICH WITH NAFTA.
BUILDING THE WALL IN MEXICO,
FOCUSING ON ECONOMIC ISSUES,
FOCUSING ON TRADE, IMMIGRATION,
A LOT OF THINGS WE'VE HEARD
DONALD TRUMP TALK ABOUT BEFORE.
I THINK THERE ARE A LOT OF
VOTERS IN NORTHERN OHIO FOR
WHICH TRADE ARE VERY IMPORTANT
AND HE'S TRYING TO HIT THOSE
NOTES WITH THEM.
>> GOVERNOR KASICH, HE'S GOT THE
LEAD RIGHT NOW WE SHOULD POINT
THAT OUT.
IF YOU'RE IN OHIO, REPUBLICAN,
AND NOT VOTING FOR GOVERNOR
KASICH WHY IS THAT?
>> IT'S INTERESTING.
GOVERNOR KASICH IS PRETTY
POPULAR RIGHT NOW IN OHIO BUT I
DID TALK WITH SOME TRUMP
SUPPORTERS AT THE RALLY AND THEY
SAID DONALD TRUMP'S MESSAGE
EXCITED THEM MORE THAN KASICH'S
DID.
I TALKED TO ONE 19-YEAR-OLD WHO
SAID TRUMP SOUNDED STRONGER THAN
KASICH.
IT WAS A GUT LEVEL DECISION FOR
HIM TO TRUMP RATHER THAN KASICH.
>> HILLARY CLINTON AND BERNIE
SANDERS VYING FOR VOTES BEFORE
TUESDAY.
TELL ME WHERE EACH STANDS.
>> HILLARY CLINTON WAS IN THE
CLEVELAND AREA IN AFRICAN
AMERICAN CHURCHES IN CLEVELAND.
SHE SPOKE A LOT ABOUT THE
ECONOMY, CRIMINAL JUSTICE,
PRISONER REENTRY, FELT LIKE
CLEVELAND HAD NOT YET RECOVERED
FROM THE RECESSION.
BERNIE SANDERS HAD A PRETTY
SIMILAR MESSAGE, CAMPAIGNED ON
TOLEDO, OHIO, AND TALKED ABOUT
THE CAMPAIGN, NAFTA AND TRYING
TO LINK SECRETARY CLINTON WITH
NAFTA.
TRYING TO LINK BLUE COLLAR
WORKERS IN TOLEDO.
>> THERE COULD BE SURPRISES
BECAUSE OF IT.
>> EARLY VOTING IS ALREADY
UNDERWAY, UNDERWAY A FEW WEEKS,
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO HAVE
ALREADY CAST THEIR VOTES AND
ALSO PEOPLE WHO ARE TRYING TO
MAKE UP THEIR MINDS SO THERE
COULD BE A DYNAMIC THERE BETWEEN
WHICH CANDIDATES GET SUPPORTED
IN THE EARLY VOTES AND WITH YOU
CANDIDATES GET SUPPORTED ON
ELECTION DAY.
>> Stewart: LEARN MORE ABOUT
WHAT'S AT STAKE FOR THE
REPUBLICAN CANDIDATES IN
FLORIDA.
WATCH OUR REPORT ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
IN GERMANY, MILLIONS OF VOTERS
IN THREE STATES WENT TO THE
POLLS TODAY, IN WHAT AMOUNTED TO
A REFERENDUM ON CHANCELLOR
ANGELA MERKEL'S WELCOMING OF
MORE THAN A MILLION REFUGEES
FROM THE MIDDLE EAST.
FOR MERKEL, IT WAS A
DISAPPOINTING SETBACK.
EXIT POLLS SHOW HER CONSERVATIVE
DEMOCRATS WILL LOSE SEATS IN THE
STATE LEGISLATURES, SOME TO ONE
ANTI-IMMIGRATION PARTY.
FOR MORE ON THIS I AM JOINED
FROM COLOGNE VIA SKYPE BY
GABRIEL BORRUD, A REPORTER FOR
THE GERMAN INTERNATIONAL
BROADCASTER DEUTSCHE WELLE.
>> GABRIEL WHAT IS TODAY'S
RESULTS MEAN FOR THE GERMAN
GOVERNMENT?
>> AT THERE POINT IT'S MORE THAN
FAIR TO SAY THAT THE,
SUPERELECTION SUNDAY IT'S BEING
CALLED WHERE CHANCELLOR ANGELA
MERKEL AND HER CONSERVATIVE CEU
THE CLEAR WINNER IS THE UPSTART
ALTERNATIVE FOR GERMANY ANY.
EVERY FIVE YEARS THESE STATES
ELECT A NEW GOVERNMENT.
THIS SUNDAY WAS ABOUT EASTERN
IMPOVERISHED STATE.
IN EACH OF THESE STATES MERKEL'S
CVO LOST GROUND AND ONE
PARTICULARLY SHOCKING EXAMPLE OF
VON WERTENBERG THE HOME OF
PORSCHE, MERCEDES BENZ, A
BASTION OF CONSERVATISM HERE,
IT'S GOING TO BE HARDER FOR
BERKLEY'S CDU TO PASS LAWS AND
THERE'S A LOT OF IMPORTANT
LEGISLATION THAT'S GOING TO HAVE
TO GO THROUGH THIS HOUSE AND
THIS IS BLACK SUNDAY FOR
MERKEL AS IT'S ALREADY BEEN
CALLED BY GERMAN MEDIA.
>> Stewart: AN AL QAEDA
AFFILIATE, AL QAEDA IN THE
ISLAMIC MAGHREB, OR NORTHWEST
AFRICA, IS CLAIMING
RESPONSIBILITY FOR TODAY'S
TERRORIST ATTACK IN THE NATION
OF IVORY COAST.
GUNMEN OPENED FIRE ON THREE
BEACHSIDE HOTELS IN THE HISTORIC
SEASIDE RESORT TOWN OF GRAND-
BASSAM.
THE COUNTRY'S PRESIDENT SAID 14
CIVILIANS AND TWO SOLDIERS WERE
KILLED, AND SECURITY FORCES
KILLED SIX ATTACKERS.
IN NEIGHBORING BURKINA FASO AND
MALI, IN RECENT MONTHS, ISLAMIC
MILITANTS KILLED 50 PEOPLE AT
HOTELS POPULAR WITH FOREIGNERS.
FRENCH AVIATION OFFICIALS ARE
RECOMMENDING NEW RULES FOR
AIRLINE PILOTS, AFTER CONCLUDING
THEIR YEAR-LONG INVESTIGATION
INTO LAST YEAR'S CRASH OF A
GERMANWINGS AIRLINER.
THE PANEL SAID TODAY: "HEALTH
CARE PROVIDERS SHOULD BE
REQUIRED TO ALERT AUTHORITIES
WHEN A PILOT'S PHYSICAL OR
MENTAL HEALTH COULD AFFECT HIS
ABILITY TO FLY."
INVESTIGATORS SAY DOCTORS KNEW
GERMAN PILOT ANDREAS LUBITZ WAS
STRUGGLING WITH SEVERE MENTAL
HEALTH PROBLEMS WHEN HE
BARRICADED HIMSELF IN THE
COCKPIT AND INTENTIONALLY
CRASHED INTO THE FRENCH ALPS,
KILLING ALL 150 PEOPLE ON BOARD.
UNDER GERMAN LAW, THERE WAS NO
DUTY TO WARN AUTHORITIES, AND
THE FRENCH REPORT ASKS THE
EUROPEAN COMMISSION TO DRAW UP
GUIDELINES.
THE UNITED NATIONS-SPONSORED
PEACE TALKS ABOUT SYRIA ARE
SCHEDULED TO RESUME IN GENEVA
TOMORROW, THE EVE OF THE FIFTH
ANNIVERSARY OF A CIVIL WAR THAT
HAS COST MORE THAN A QUARTER-
MILLION LIVES AND CREATED A
REFUGEE CRISIS.
REPRESENTATIVES OF SYRIAN
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD HAVE
AGREED TO ATTEND, BUT ARE
REJECTING CALLS BY THE U.N. FOR
NEW PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
WITHIN 18-MONTHS.
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY AND FRANCE'S FOREIGN
MINISTER SAID THAT POSITION
COULD DISRUPT THE TALKS AND A
THREE-WEEK OLD CEASE-FIRE WHICH
HAS GREATLY REDUCED FIGHTING AND
CASUALTIES.
THERE'S BEEN ANOTHER DEADLY CAR
BOMBING IN TURKEY'S CAPITAL,
ANKARA.
TURKISH OFFICIALS SAY AT LEAST
33 PEOPLE WERE KILLED AND MORE
THAN 75 WOUNDED IN AN EXPLOSION
TONIGHT CLOSE TO CROWDED BUS
STOPS NEAR THE CITY'S MAIN
SQUARE.
A CAR BOMB ONLY BLOCKS AWAY
KILLED 29 PEOPLE JUST LAST
MONTH.
>> Stewart: DESPITE ADVANCES IN
MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, AND
EDUCATION, THE GAP IN LIFE
EXPECTANCY BETWEEN HIGH-INCOME
AND LOW-INCOME AMERICANS IS
GROWING.
THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION
RECENTLY FOUND THAT A WEALTHY
AMERICAN MAN BORN IN 1920 LIVED
SIX YEARS LONGER THAN A POOR MAN
BORN THAT SAME YEAR.
BUT FOR A MAN BORN IN 1950, THAT
DIFFERENCE HAS MORE THAN DOUBLED
TO 14 YEARS, WHILE FOR WOMEN,
THAT GAP GREW FROM FIVE TO 13
YEARS.
TO REVIEW THE IMPLICATIONS OF
THIS, OUR HARI SREENIVASAN
RECENTLY SAT DOWN WITH LISA
BERKMAN, THE DIRECTOR OF HARVARD
UNIVERSITY'S CENTER FOR
POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT
STUDIES.
THE INTERVIEW IS PART OF OUR
POVERTY IN AMERICA SERIES,"
CHASING THE DREAM."
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHY IS THIS
GAP GROWING?
>> WELL THAT'S PERHAPS THE MOST
INTERESTING QUESTION BUT ONE OF
THE THINGS TO PUT INTO
PERSPECTIVE IS THAT THIS GAP HAS
BEEN GROWING FOR PROBABLY THE
LAST 50 YEARS.
SO THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN RICH
AND POOR WAS GETTING SMALLER AND
SMALLER.
THROUGH A GREAT PART OF THE
1900S THROUGH ABOUT 1950 OR 60.
AND THEN SOMETHING STARTED TO
CHANGE.
AND THAT FLIP SUGGESTS THAT
THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT OUR
ENVIRONMENT, SOMETHING ABOUT OUR
SET OF POLICIES, THAT WOULD
DRIVE THAT.
SO THE REALLY CLEVER THING ABOUT
THE BROOKINGS STUDY WHICH IS
REALLY OUTSTANDING IS THEY
DIVIDED EACH BIRTH COHORT, IF
YOU WERE BORN IN 1940S THEY
DIVIDED YOU INTO 10 PERCENTAGE
POINT DECILES, PEOPLE AT THE
BOTTOM HAD NO INCREASE IN LIFE
EXPECTANCY OVER THE LAST 20 OR
30 YEARS.
PEOPLE AT THE TOP EXPERIENCED
THESE ENORMOUS GAINS, SOMEWHERE
SIX TO EIGHT YEARS.
PEOPLE AT THE BOTTOM STAYED THE
SAME AND ALL THE BENEFITS THAT
HAVE HAPPENED IN THE TERMS OF
LIFE EXPECTANCY IN THE LAST
YEARS HAVE OCCURRED FOR THE
BEST-OFF IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: DO THE RICH
EXPERIENCE LIFE BETTER THAN THE
POOR DO?
>> WE KNOW THAT PHYSICAL HEALTH,
SMOKING MAY EXPLAIN PART OF THE
DIFFERENCE IN THIS INEQUALITY,
IT'S UNLIKELY THAT THESE
BEHAVIORS ACTUALLY EXPLAIN VERY
MUCH.
I MEAN IN FACT IN THE BROOKINGS
REPORT THEY EXAMINED THAT QUITE
CAREFULLY AND CAME TO THE
CONCLUSION THAT BEHAVIORS WERE
NOT THE ANSWER TO THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TYPE OF
WORK THE DO VERSUS THE TYPE OF
WORK THE POOR DO, IF THE POOR
ARE IN COAL MINES OR AMONG
CHEMICAL NOXIOUS FUMES, DOES
THAT START TO FACTOR INTO THIS?
>> I THINK SO.
PROBABLY A SET OF JOB EXPOSURES
ARE VERY IMPORTANT.
IT IS INTERESTING THE ONES YOU
PICK, THE PHYSICALLY DEMANDING
JOBS WORKING IN A COAL MINE, THE
KINDS OF ACCIDENTS THAT PEOPLE
USED TO HAVE AT THE TURN OF THE
CENTURY, THAT HAS BEEN A HUGE
SUCCESS STORY IN TERMS OF
FEDERAL REGULATION FOR
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY.
SO IT MEANS IN SOME WAY THAT
ANOTHER SET OF EXPOSURES THAT
ARE RELATED TO WORK MIGHT BE ON
THE LURCH OUT THERE AND THEY MAY
HAVE TO DO WITH JOB SECURITY,
WORK-FAMILY CONFLICT, JOB
STRAIN.
JUST THE SHEER HOURS OF WORKING.
AND WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT THAT AT
THE UPPER LEVEL, OBVIOUSLY
PEOPLE WHO ARE IN THE UPPER
REACHES OF EDUCATION AND INCOME
HAVE MANY OF THOSE SAME
EXPERIENCE BUT THEY HAVE MANY,
MANY MANY RESOURCES.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE A
GEOGRAPHIC BREAKDOWN, ARTS OF
THE COUNTRY THAT ARE MORE
AFFECTED THAN OTHERS OR IS IT
ZIP CODE BY ZIP CODE IN THE SAME
CITY?
>> THIS LAST -- THERE LAST BEEN
A LOT OF WORK IN REGARDS TO
GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY.
SOUTH VERSUS NORTH, FOR
INSTANCE, LIFE EXPECTANCY IN
MANY SOUTHERN STATES IS MUCH
WORSE BUT THE THING YOU'RE
ALLUDING TO IS THE DIFFERENCE IN
ZIP CODE.
YOU COULD BE IN ONE CITY AND IF
YOU WERE IN ONE ZIP CODE YOUR
LIFE COULD BE VERY, VERY VERY
DIFFERENT THAN LIVING IN A ZIP
CODE THAT WAS MUCH BETTER OFF.
>> Sreenivasan: I REMEMBER
BEING IN BALTIMORE LAST YEAR AND
LITERAL A DIFFERENCE OF SIX
BLOCKS WAS MASSIVE DIFFERENCE.
>> YOU COULD GET ON THE SUBWAY
AND LIFE EXPECTANCY WAS FIVE
YEARS DIFFERENT OR SIX YEARS
DIFFERENT.
NOW AGAIN THE REASONS FOR THAT
ARE PRETTY INTERESTING TO THINK
ABOUT BECAUSE IT IS EASY TO
THINK THAT THEY ARE OUGHT
ATTRIBUTED TO -- ALL ATTRIBUTED
TO THAT NEIGHBORHOOD OR TO THE
COMMUNITY.
IT MAY BE THAT THERE ARE SOME
NEIGHBORHOOD BE VARIABLES OR
CONDITIONS THAT ARE VERY RISKY.
WE KNOW THAT PHYSICAL POLLUTION,
ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURES, TOXIC
EXPOSURES GET MORE CONCENTRATED
IN POOR AREAS.
SO PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN POOR
NEIGHBORHOODS CAN BE MORE
EXPOSED TO PHYSICAL
ENVIRONMENTS.
WITH NOXIOUS KIND OF RISKS.
WE ALSO KNOW THAT THEIR SOCIAL
RISKS COULD BE DIFFERENT, LEVELS
OF VIOLENCE COULD BE DIFFERENT
IN DIFFERENT NEIGHBORHOODS JOB
OPPORTUNITIES, ACCESS TO HEALTHY
FOOD, PLACES TO EXERCISE, ALL OF
THESE THINGS ARE PATTERNED BY
NEIGHBORHOOD.
SO WHERE WE LIVE IS A VERY
IMPORTANT DETERMINANT OF THIS
GROWING INEQUALITY.
BUT IT'S NOT THE ONLY ONE.
SO I THINK WE HAVE TO THINK
ABOUT WHERE WE LIVE, WHERE WE
WORK, AND PROBABLY, HOW OUR
FAMILIES ARE CONSTITUTED.
>> DOES ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE
SEEM TO AFFECT THIS AT ALL?
>> IT SEEMS ACCESS TO HEALTH IS
IMPORTANT AND THE HEALTH CARE IS
TERRIBLY IMPORTANT IN PROVIDING
ACCESS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
BUT HEALTH INSURANCE HAS ANOTHER
GOAL WHICH IS TO KEEP PEOPLE OUT
OF POVERTY.
>> Sreenivasan: RIGHT.
>> ANOTHER IDEA IS IF YOU HAD A
HEART ATTACK YOU COULD EASILY BE
SWAMPED WITH THE COST ASSOCIATED
WITH HOSPITALIZATION AND YOU
MIGHT HAVE TO SELL YOUR HOUSE.
YOU WOULD LOSE YOUR JOB.
ANY NUMBER OF BAD THINGS WOULD
HAPPEN.
TO HEALTH INSURANCE CAN BE GOOD
FOR YOU -- SO HEAL INSURANCE
COULD BE GOOD FOR YOU BY SORT OF
PREVENTING ECONOMIC SHOCKS.
>> WHAT ABOUT THE OTHER EXISTING
SAFETY NET PROGRAMS WE HAVE,
SOCIAL SECURITY OR MEDICARE?
>> THERE ARE A NUMBER OF
EXAMPLES OF PUBLIC POLICIES THAT
DO WORK.
ONE OF THE THINGS I TALK ABOUT
IS EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT.
EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT
ENCOURAGES MEN AN WOMEN TO STAY
IN THE LABOR FORCE AND IT DOES
THAT SUCCESSFULLY.
IT ALSO TURNS OUT THAT IT
PROMOTES HEALTHY BIRTHS AND
INFANCY AND WOMEN WHO ARE ON --
WHO GET AN EARNED INCOME TAX
CREDIT ACTUALLY SMOKE LESS.
MEDICARE MEDICAID CERTAINLY ARE
POLICIES THAT WILL SOON BE
LINKED TO THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT.
>> Sreenivasan: ARE THERE
OTHER POLICIES THAT YOU SEE THAT
WE COULD TRY TO THINK ABOUT OR
FIDUCIARY FORWARD THAT WOULD
ACTUALLY WORK ON THIS GAP?
>> YEAH.
SO ONE OF THE MOST FORTUNATE
AREAS WE SUSPECT IS IMPORTANT IS
THIS WORK-FAMILY FLEXIBILITY SET
OF ISSUES.
SO WE ARE VIRTUALLY THE ONLY
COUNTRY IN THE WORLD THAT
DOESN'T HAVE A FEDERAL FAMILY
LEAVE PROVISION.
EXCEPT AN UNPAID FAMILY MEDICAL
LEAVE.
I THINK THAT MIGHT GO VERY, VERY
FAR.
AND IN FACT WE HAVE DATA FROM
EUROPE THAT IN COUNTRIES WHERE
PEOPLE WERE EXPOSED TO FAMILY
LEAVE POLICIES, WHEN THEY WERE
OLDER, THEY WERE HEALTHIER, THEY
WERE LESS DEPRESSED, AND THEY
SAID IN THE WORKFORCE.
-- AND THEY STAYED IN THE
WORKFORCE LONGER.
SO I THINK WE SHOULD THINK ABOUT
A IS THE OF POLICIES AROUND WORK
AND FAMILY ISSUES, FLEXIBILITY
AND ULTIMATELY WE NEED TO THINK
ABOUT SOCIAL SECURITY QUITE
CAREFULLY.
>> Sreenivasan: THANKS SO
MUCH FOR JOINING -- LISA BERKMAN
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> Stewart: CONGRESS IS
CONSIDERING REGULATING ONE OF
THE MOST UNPOPULAR ASPECTS OF
FLYING: THOSE AIRLINE FEES FOR
RESERVATION CHANGES, CHECKED
LUGGAGE, AND EVEN LEG ROOM.
A BILL INTRODUCED THIS WEEK IS
CALLED, LITERALLY, "THE
FORBIDDING AIRLINES FROM
IMPOSING RIDICULOUS FEES ACT,"
OR FAIR.
JOINING ME NOW FROM DALLAS TO
DISCUSS THE ISSUE AND THE
PROPOSED REMEDIES IS "BLOOMBERG
MEDIA" AVIATION AND TRAVEL
ASSOCIATE EDITOR JUSTIN BACHMAN.
WHO SPONSORED THIS LEGISLATION,
WHY AND WHY NOW?
>> IT'S FROM TWO SENATORS WHO
ARE AT LEAST ED MARKEY FROM
MASSACHUSETTS AND JOE
BLOOMENTHAL.
THINGS ARE GETTING A LITTLE
TIGHT AND A LITTLE BIT
UNCOMFORTABLE.
>> WHAT KIND OF FEES ARE BEING
TARGETED AS EGREGIOUS?
>> THIS TALKS ABOUT FEES IN
CHARGE WHEN YOU WANT TO CANCEL
YOUR TICKET, THE FEES YOU GET
CHARGED WHEN YOU CHECK A BAG OR
TWO OR THREE.
MOST AIRLINES IT'S UP TO 10.
WHEN YOU GET TO 10 IT CAN BE
PRETTY HIGH.
>> Stewart: CAN YOU GIVE ME AN
EXAMPLE HOW HIGH THESE FEES CAN
GO?
>> YEAH, IF YOU ARE FLYING
INTERNATIONALLY AND YOU WANTED
TO CHANGE YOUR TICKET AND IT'S A
NON-CHANGEABLE TICKET YOU ARE
PAYING UP TO $200 FOR THAT
CHANGE FEE.
>> Stewart: AND IS THAT WHAT
REALLY HAS PEOPLE EXORCIZED?
>> THAT'S A PRETTY PROMINENT
EXAMPLE.
THE CHANGE FEE IS A LOT OF ONE
THAT PEOPLE TELL THEIR FOLKS IN
CONGRESS WE DON'T LIKE THIS.
>> Stewart: HOW MUCH ARE WE
TALKING ABOUT THE AIRLINES ARE
MAKING ON THESE FEES?
>> ALTOGETHER MORE THAN $5
BILLION A YEAR FROM THE ARE
INDUSTRY.
THAT'S A LARGE AMOUNT OF MONEY
THAT GOES DIRECTLY TO THE BOTTOM
LINE.
SO FEES HAVE BECOME A VERY
CRITICAL ASPECT OF YOU KNOW
AIRLINE PROFITABILITY THESE
DAYS.
>> Stewart: IF WE PULL OUT A
LITTLE BIT THIS ISN'T JUST ABOUT
BAGGAGE FEES NECESSARILY.
THIS IS ABOUT REGULATION.
CAN YOU EXPLAIN THAT A LITTLE
BIT MORE?
>> YEAH, THIS -- IN 1978
CONGRESS PASSED A BILL TO
DEREGULATE THE AIRLINE INDUSTRY
SO THERE WAS NO GOVERNMENT
INTERVENTION IN WHAT FARES WOULD
BE, WHAT ROUTES WOULD BE, WHAT
AIRLINES FLY.
AND NOW WE'RE TALKING ABOUT AN
AREA WHERE CONGRESS WOULD GET
INVOLVED AND SAY THERE ARE SOME
RULES ON WHAT YOU CAN CHARGE AND
NOT CHARGE THE PUBLIC FOR BAGS
AND TICKET CHANGES AND THAT.
SO THIS WOULD BE A REALLY FAIRLY
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE THAT YOU
KNOW, THAT IMPOSES A PRETTY BIG
HURDLE FOR THIS BILL TO GET
FORWARD.
>> YOU'RE WRITING ABOUT IT YOU
SIT WAS A LONG SHOT, IS THAT THE
REASON?
>> IT'S A LONG SHOT BECAUSE THE
FACT THAT CONGRESS WOULD GET
INTO PRICING AND CONGRESS DOES
REALLY NOT GET INTO THE BUSINESS
OF PRICING FOR COMPANIES.
>> Stewart: AIRLINES ARE
PUSHING BACK, HOW SO?
>> THEY PUT OUT A STATEMENT THEY
DON'T LIKE THIS BILL.
THE QUESTION IS HOW FAR DOES IT
NEED TO ADVANCE BEFORE THEY PUSH
BACK?
YOU WILL SEE A VERY CONCERTED
ACTION FROM THE AIRLINE
INDUSTRY.
>> JUSTIN BACHMAN, THANKS.
>> AND FINALLY TONIGHT THERE
WERE 8,000 APPLICANTS FOR THE
SECOND ANNUAL GLOBAL TEACHER
PRIZE.
THE WINNER ANNOUNCED TODAY IS
PALESTINIAN TEACHER HANAN AL
HARUB.
SHE SAYS SHE'LL USE THE PRIZE TO
INTRODUCE A SCHOLARSHIP FOR
FUTURE TEACHERS.
TOMORROW, WE REPORT FROM OHIO
A DAY AHEAD OF THE STATE'S
CRITICAL PRIMARY.
THAT'S ALL FOR PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M ALISON STEWART, GOOD NIGHT.